-Noel, I got a few questions for you.
-Hit me up.
-Flan or tart, what's the difference?
-Ask Prue.
-What's an even bake?
-Ask Paul.
-Do you know anything about baking?
-No.
-How long you been on the show?
-Seven years.
-Do you still find a soggy bottom funny?
-I do.
Has anyone been injured
by a Hollywood handshake?
I'm not at liberty to disclose
that information.
Who's Kate's Corner?
It's cake corner. Kate's Corner is
the woman who lives down my street.
-What's cake corner?
-A corner where we eat cake.
-What week is it?
-Bread Week.
-Can I do the fun part now?
-Yes.
Welcome to The Great British Baking Show.
-Did you enjoy that?
-Loved it.
[Alison] This time it's Bread Week.
-[Josh] I'm nervous.
-[Alison] Are you?
-I don't want him to not like it. Yeah.
-Is it all about Paul?
[Alison] The bakers take on a classic
cottage loaf signature.
Oh, I've never been so stressed
making bread.
[Abbi gasps] It's enormous, Rowan.
Oh, my God.
-[Alison] A traditional technical…
-[exhales]
-…that leaves some hot under the collar.
-Cool those balls.
-[Alison] And a plaited showstopper…
-Help me, Lord.
-…that has them tied up in knots.
-[Rowan groans]
-Oh.
-[Dan] Stressful.
-[Saku gasps]
-[Rowan] Chuffing heck.
You just want an easy life.
[opening theme music playing]
Bread Week is one of the most
feared weeks, isn't it?
'Cause Paul's gonna be coming round
poking all our loaves,
seeing if they're cooked or not.
Love baking my bread,
not sure about doing it
with Paul Hollywood
looking at me but… [laughs]
[Saku] Paul is the bread king.
Ah, so nervous.
Don't know if it's nerves or the prawn I
had last night, but something's churning.
[chuckling] I've definitely
got the bread dread.
Hello, bakers, welcome back to the tent.
It's Bread Week.
And for your signature challenge,
the judges would love you
to make a cottage loaf.
Paul and Prue are looking
for a classic cottage loaf shape.
That's two stacked cobs.
And don't worry,
it doesn't have to be an actual cottage.
[Noel laughs]
They are not gonna spend
a mini-break inside your loaf.
[Alison laughs]
Your loaves can be any flavour,
and the style of bread dough
is up to you, so go wild.
These are heady times we're living in.
[chuckles] You've got two hours,
and, because we're feeling generous,
another 45 minutes.
-On your marks…
-Get set…
Bake.
[mouths] Yes!
[Nicky] Let's get going
with this then.
I do like bread,
so hopefully Paul will like it.
Hopefully, it'll all go to plan.
I don't make bread,
so this is not my week.
-Everyone's scared of eating bread now.
-Not me.
-[chuckling] No, not me.
-I eat bread.
That's my bread pouch.
Muffin, crumpet, baguettes.
[both laugh]
It's Bread Week,
the signature challenge is a cottage loaf.
[Prue] It's two loaves,
one on top of the other.
A little round one on the top,
a bigger round one underneath.
The lovely thing about a cottage loaf,
simple though it is,
is it does cover all the skills
that really matter in bread making.
You need to spend time
developing that gluten,
mixing and kneading properly.
You don't want it to be too dense.
Bit of spring in it.
The joining of the two balls is important,
and they must be stable
and grow up, rather than flat,
you want a bit of height.
[Prue] We want perfection.
To impress us,
they've gotta make good bread.
-[Paul] Morning, Cristy.
-[Prue] Hello, Cristy.
Cristy, tell us all about
your cottage loaf.
So, I'm doing dried cranberries,
chopped walnuts and rosemary.
-Is this a favourite recipe?
-Yeah.
My kids love it, I love it.
[Noel] Always a hit at home,
Cristy's loaf packed full of sweet
cranberries, rosemary and walnuts,
also contains multigrain flour
for an extra hit of nutty flavour.
Do you think it hinders the growth
of the dough if you add too much flavour?
Yeah. No. I don't know.
[chuckles nervously]
-It's not a test.
-Okay, you make me nervous.
I just wanna impress you both.
-Good luck. I think it sounds great.
-Okay. Thank you.
-Thanks, Alison.
-It's not an exam.
[Cristy] I'm nervous. It's 'cause he knows
everything about bread.
-You've got this. You've made it before.
-I'm full of bread. Not stopped eating it.
Have you been eating bread?
I love a bit of bread.
I can do it all day long.
[Noel] Saku's also aiming to impress
with a family favourite.
[Saku] My kids love cinnamon toast
with orange juice,
so I'm making cinnamon
and orange cottage loaf.
[Alison] She'll add orange zest
to her dough for a citrus kick
to complement the warmth of cinnamon
she's sourced from somewhere special.
[Saku] Sri Lanka is very famous
for its spices.
Always my cinnamon coming from Sri Lanka.
This is from home. [laughs]
I brought my own rosemary from home,
so from my mum's garden.
She has a very small vegetable garden.
[chuckling] She won't like that I said
it's small. It's her pride and joy.
[Noel] Looking to build
on last week's success,
reigning Star Baker Tasha will roast
her mum's rosemary with garlic,
before kneading it
through her seed-packed dough.
But her classic flavour combination
faces competition.
I was quietly confident,
and then there are four people
doing rosemary and garlic.
But it's fine. It's just
a battle of the garlic. [chuckles]
[Dan] This is wild garlic.
Love picking my wild garlic.
Got a secret patch near me
no one knows about. [chuckles]
[Alison] Foraging fan Dan will add
rosemary and smoked bacon
to his wild garlic
to flavour his main loaf.
And he'll make a wild garlic pesto
to fold through his top cob.
-[Noel] Do you go foraging?
-I do, yeah. I do a bit of fungus.
Fungus. You got a basket?
-Yeah.
-What do you wear? Speedos?
-Yeah, leopard skin Speedos.
-[Noel laughs]
-Massive top hat. With a door in it.
-Flippers. Yeah.
-Throw the mushrooms in.
-Throw 'em in.
[both laugh]
Just gonna check how the gluten is doing.
It feels pretty good.
[Noel] Kneading the dough
helps to develop the strands of gluten,
crucial to producing the perfect texture
demanded by Paul and Prue.
[Dan] Like a rocky motion
to get right through the dough.
[Noel] It's a labour-intensive task.
[Dan] You warmed up, Nicky?
[Nicky] Have I warmed up?
I'm getting there.
I need to take my jumper off.
Letting the machine do the hard work,
and then I'll put it out on the bench
for a couple of minutes
and just pretend
that I've done it. [laughs]
I like kneading by hand
'cause it gives you more control.
And you can feel when it's ready,
rather than just guess.
I've done 300 hand kneads.
I count them all to make sure.
[Alison] Abbi taste-tested her garlic
and rosemary cottage loaf
with the local village community lunch
where it went down a storm.
A success she puts down to the addition
of a special ingredient.
[Abbi] I'm using smoked garlic,
and it has an absolutely amazing… smell.
Garlic, rosemary, just really nice.
[Nicky] It's a great classic combo,
isn't it?
The roasting of the garlic
just enhances the flavour.
And I've got Scottish sea salt.
Oops, look at that.
Went in a bit too much.
[Noel] Nicky will add her roast garlic,
rosemary and Scottish sea salt paste
to her dough after its first prove.
And to ensure even distribution,
she's taking no risks.
I am not going to use the stand mixer.
I'm doing it by hand.
I'm doing the kneading in the mixer
to save me some arm strength, basically.
I like heat, so I'm doing chipotle,
smoked cheddar and bacon.
This is smoked cheddar.
It's literally just amplifying
that smoky taste.
So, if he says he can't taste
the flavour, that's a lie. [laughs]
Ooh.
God.
[gasps]
[Dana] I meant to do that.
You can taste shards of glass.
Yummy.
[Alison] Starting from scratch,
Dana will add smoked paprika
to her second batch of spicy chipotle
dough for an extra hit of smoky heat.
I think it should be great
as long as it's not overpowering.
Sometimes smoke can just be too much.
It's not like a bonfire smoke.
More like a subtle kick.
-Have you got a name for your bread?
-Erm, Bread-ley Cooper.
-Bread-ley Cooper.
-I thought a bit of spice.
-[all laugh]
-I love that.
This is about the stage I'm happy with.
You hold it up to the window,
it'll stretch out nice and thin,
without tearing.
You can see through it.
-[Dan] That'll do us.
-Beautiful.
It's just gonna go now
into a proving drawer for an hour.
-[Tasha] Gonna fit? Yeah.
-Now, the waiting game.
This is the "sit and have
a cup of tea" part of the bake.
Which is very nice, for once,
in a challenge.
I didn't bring a book to read
or game to play. [laughs]
[Tasha] Let's play tic-tac-toe.
-[Alison] Are you into cricket?
-[Saku] Yes!
-I'm such a good batter.
-Really?
-So good.
-I'm a bowler.
You could bowl, I could bat.
-[Nicky] It's not gonna work, is it?
-No. Oh, my God.
-It's a complete disaster.
-[both laugh]
Go on.
[groans]
[Saku] Sorry.
[laughing]
Right in the thigh.
I thought you was gonna do it softly. Ah.
I feel like everybody has got theirs…
proving, and I'm still working on mine.
It's a big dough. I've got, like,
700 grams of flour in here.
[Noel] Rowan's large loaf filled
with kalamata olives and sundried tomatoes
is inspired by a sun-strewn holiday
to the Med.
I went to Amalfi.
The Amalfi Coast. It were expensive.
I mean, a sorbet you had to take out
a mortgage, so it was,
erm, it was a place I'd never go back to.
[Alison] Far from the glitz and glamour
of the Italian Riviera,
Josh is recreating
one of Italy's more humble offerings.
I am making a pizza-inspired nduja,
er, and honey, erm, cottage loaf.
I've got nduja-spiced spreadable sausage,
which will be spread over the dough
once it's proved.
No flavours in the first prove.
It's gonna affect the way it rises,
so I'll mix it in on the second one.
[Noel] Along with spicy nduja sausage,
Josh will throw handfuls of black olives,
basil and gruyère
into his loaf
for that flavour-packed pizza experience.
-It's like a meal.
-Yeah.
A lot of things going on in there.
It doesn't inhibit its rise or anything?
It gets a nice rise.
It's risky putting cheese in there,
but I wanted to give myself a challenge.
-Good luck.
-Thank you very much.
-Bakers, you are halfway through.
-[Noel] You can do it, guys.
-Maybe.
-[laughs]
I'm just gonna have to go with it.
[Saku] Looks like all right.
Yes.
[Dan] A lovely first prove.
You can see the bubbles, you can see
a lot of carbon dioxide in there.
Remember my elements then.
[Tasha] It's not as proved
as I would like.
But the second prove is far more important
because that's what gives you the shape.
-[Alison] But before shaping starts…
-[Dan] Put my filling in.
[Alison] …there's one last opportunity
to add even more flavour to their dough.
[Josh] I've got gruyère cheese,
basil and I've got some olives.
It looks like a pizza anyway, so…
Who doesn't like a bit of roast garlic?
Ooh. And with your meat.
This is the smoked cheddar.
I'm just gonna get that rolled in.
[Dan] Making sure
it all goes through the dough
and there's no sort of empty pockets.
I'm pleased with this. Just want to
get a good bit of shaping on it.
[Noel] Key to creating the classic
cottage loaf shape is both size
and proportion.
[Abbi] The top is a bit smaller.
It has that little hat.
[Rowan] Gonna split it into a third
and two-thirds. They're big balls.
I don't want it to be like
a stuck-on ball on top of the bottom.
[Matty] Three-quarters to a quarter.
You gotta trust your instinct
which is easier said than done
when everyone else
is doing the same thing, but different.
[Alison] Bursting with olives,
sundried tomato and parmesan,
Matty's keen to add heat to his loaf
with the addition
of chilli flakes to his dough.
The flavours are great inside.
When it comes to the look of it,
tell us about the proportion.
Your ball size.
[chuckles softly]
Three-quarters bottom, one quarter on top.
You've got a little one on top and then
-a big ball underneath.
-[chuckles] Yeah.
They're in proportion.
-They seem slightly out of proportion.
-[laughs]
-Don't be naughty.
-I'm just saying.
Would you go two-thirds, one-third?
It's entirely up to you.
[inhales sharply]
[Noel] Not only does a cottage loaf
require perfectly proportioned balls…
Hello, wee man.
…but the bakers must ensure
that they stay firmly in place too.
Here we go.
[Abbi] Flour up the old fingers.
Oh, dear.
I'm a bit stuck.
[chuckles softly]
Just three firm jabs.
[Saku] I hope it will work.
[singsong] Going in
the proving drawer again.
That's the biggest loaf
I have made in a long time.
Right, half an hour in there.
Have you got a proving drawer at home?
No. The kitchen's normally
about the right temperature.
-[Noel] Is it too cold in here?
-[Nicky] It's baltic.
-Do you get cold hands?
-[Noel] I do.
If you put your hands out like that
and pump really hard up and down…
-[laughs] You don't get cold hands?
-You don't.
-Really?
-Yeah.
And an egg comes out.
[both laughing]
[Noel] Bakers,
you only have one hour left.
[Noel laughing]
Few more minutes.
[Noel] It's a lot of proving, innit?
It is. They don't do
anything in this, do they?
No, just wandering about waiting--
-Like what we do.
-[both laughing]
It's just about holding your nerve.
Risky.
[Matty] If you don't give it time to rise,
then it's gonna be more
like a flat bread. [laughs]
[Abbi] Hmm, it's a bit flat, innit?
Oh, my gosh, she's not very
cottage loaf-shaped any more.
Hmm.
[Rowan] I'm painting my ball
in red, blue and green.
To make it look Italian.
I wanted to add a bit of pop.
[Noel] Did you pop it in
the proving drawer?
-[Dana] Yes.
-[Noel] Did it get bigger?
My problem is
I can't remember the size of it
before I put it in the proving drawer.
[laughs] So…
-Goldfish.
-I'm kind of like…
It's getting there. I know. Oh!
Wish I had a photogenic memory,
I'd be like, "That's risen by an eighth."
-Can you have a photogenic memory?
-No, but photographic.
-[both laughing]
-However…
[Rowan] In it goes.
It'll bake for about 50 minutes
'cause it's so huge.
Three more minutes.
[Abbi] Pancakes for breakfast, everybody.
Here she is.
What shall we name her? Janice.
[Tasha] I'm gonna score it.
[Alison] Scoring the dough is key
to maintaining the unique
cottage loaf shape.
Letting it breathe a bit,
so that when it bakes, it can expand.
[Alison] And deep precise cuts
will produce better shaped loaves.
Are you scoring it with this?
[Nicky] I've got a lame.
-[Matty] I've got a sharp knife I--
-That's all right. [whooshes]
Looks cottage-y.
We're going in for 30 minutes.
Forty to 45 minutes
is what it does at home.
[Abbi] Oh, there you go, Janice.
Maybe the oven will solve all ailments.
I've just…
Now gotta watch it bake. Oh, God.
I'm going to sit here
and watch and pray. [laughs]
-It's looking great.
-Just turned it round.
I'm trying to give it a good colour.
Paul likes a lot of colour on his bread.
-Yeah. I'm excited. Are you excited?
-I'm really nervous.
-You nervous?
-I don't want him to not like it.
-Is it all about Paul?
-Yeah.
-Good luck.
-Thanks.
I can't wait for this.
Bakers, you've got 15 minutes.
Till Paul Hollywood comes in
with his mahogany fists
and smashes your dreams.
-[snickers]
-Oh, mine's so lopsided. [chuckles]
[Saku] I'm feeling happier than earlier.
[Abbi] Paul's not gonna be happy.
Top's merged into the bottom.
I'm a bit annoyed.
[softly] Rise.
Oh, bloody hell, she's massive.
It's really ballooned.
-It's enormous, Rowan.
-Oh, my God.
-Not done.
-[Rowan] Oh, it's disastrous.
-It's literally come off.
-[Abbi] Oh!
[Tasha gasps]
What do I do? Shall I rod it?
Well, I'm a bit panicky about this now.
-[Abbi] He's rodding it.
-[Tasha] That's a good shout.
Oh, I've never been
so stressed making bread.
[Rowan] Chuffing heck,
this is a bit high pressure.
You just want an easy life.
-[Abbi] Oh, it's cooked.
-I think it's done.
[Tasha] Gotta check temperatures
'cause a lot of bakers tap the bottom
and listen to the sound.
Sounds hollow inside. Like that.
I can't do that.
[Cristy] Oh, it's hollow.
[Saku] Lovely!
[Rowan] Oh, my God, this is diabolical.
I might scream.
Bakers, you've got one minute left,
just one minute.
[Nicky] Coming out in 30 seconds.
Just waiting till the last second.
These are the flowers
from the wild garlic.
[Abbi] Oh, it's such a pancake.
[Rowan] It's coming out.
There we are.
[Cristy] I don't know.
Really happy with that. Perfect.
[Rowan] Oh, my gosh, it's just so big.
Bakers, your time is up.
[exhales heavily]
[Nicky] That looks amazing.
I am happy with that.
Hopefully they will like the taste.
[Rowan] You look around and you're like,
[gasps] "See it's all,
they're all kind of perfect."
[Rowan groans]
This is the failure corner.
Oh, dearie me.
[Noel] The bakers' cottage loaves
now face the judgement of Paul and Prue.
-Hello, Saku.
-Hello.
[Paul] It looks pretty good.
The cuts have gone slightly awry,
but overall, I like the colour
and I like the height.
-Go on then. Cut it.
-[Paul] Let's have a look.
[grunts]
-[Noel] Smells good.
-Really cinnamon-y.
I don't get the orange very much,
but the cinnamon's there.
I do get the orange,
a hint in the background.
The cinnamon is good.
Your flavour combinations are spot on.
But, erm, your bread itself
is slightly underproved.
You can see
where you've put your finger in.
And it's concertinaed at the bottom.
It's a nice loaf.
You were ten minutes away
from something very good.
-Well done.
-Thank you.
Phew.
[Prue] It's certainly rustic.
I think you've fumbled when you cut this
'cause it's all over the place.
Doesn't look too bad.
It is a lot of filling,
but actually it works.
Nothing is overpowering anything else.
-Chilli's coming in at the end.
-[chuckles]
-It's lovely.
-Thank you.
[Paul] It's split quite badly,
this is down to underproving it.
-Mmm-hmm.
-It needed another ten minutes.
You got a great bake on it though.
-[Prue] Certainly cheesy.
-[chuckles]
Smokiness comes through beautifully,
cheese and chipotle as well.
It is a bit doughty,
but your flavours are good.
[Prue] Hmm.
It looks monstrous.
How much flour did you use?
Er, nigh on 700 grams.
It's a big loaf.
[Paul] But the structure is spot on.
-[Rowan] Yeah.
-[Paul] Great colour.
The olives come through beautifully,
sundried tomatoes, not so much.
I can taste the sundried tomatoes,
but I don't think
the little Ss add anything.
You should've just written "Paul is king."
Bread king.
-Thank you, Rowan.
-Thank you.
Monstrous.
-It's fine, I've been called worse.
-[both laugh]
-[Paul] It's dense inside.
-[Nicky] Yes.
-I'm getting salt.
-[Prue] Hmm, quite a lot of salt.
What's the level of salt you put in?
The original prove was just seven grams
and then after that I just went…
Oh, you added more.
In with the paste.
-Just did a wee--
-Probably why we're picking it up then.
-Yeah.
-Because you just went over that balance.
Colour, I love.
Cuts, I like, Nice and deep.
[Prue] I think it looks really appetising.
Needs a bit of salt.
Considering you had cranberries,
walnuts in there, it's a bit bland.
-But overall, I think it's a decent loaf.
-Okay.
This is Flat Janice,
her cottage is a bungalow.
[Abbi and Prue laughing]
[Paul] Let's have a look.
How much garlic
did you put in it, all of it?
Not all of it. Like, six cloves.
It's quite strong.
Can't taste the rosemary.
-Oh, okay.
-Erm…
-When it comes to salt…
-[Abbi] Yeah.
…it's a bland loaf. All you get…
-Is garlic.
-[Paul] …is garlic.
-Not enough salt.
-[Abbi] Yeah.
And that's affected the structure
and that's why it'll look like this.
[Prue] Taste it with a bit of the crust,
'cause that's really nice.
-Oh, yeah.
-Bit of salt on it, it'll be lovely.
Mmm. Good job, Janice. [laughs]
[Paul] Lovely colour.
It's turned out quite nicely.
You've pretty much got the proving right.
-The flavour is great.
-[Paul] Mmm.
[Prue] Nice balance of cheese and chilli.
There is considerable heat in that.
I like it.
[Prue] It's lovely.
I'm surprised. I thought cheese and olives
are gonna hold it down,
it's going to become claggy and…
But it's lovely.
-Well done, Josh.
-Thank you.
[whispering] Well done.
Phew. [laughs]
[Prue] If you saw that
in a baker's shop, you'd buy it
because it looks
so rustic and so appetising.
-Looks quite appealing, doesn't it?
-Hmm. Let's have a look.
[Prue] It's clever,
the pesto going through it.
My issue is it stays in one place. Have to
distribute it amongst the whole loaf.
-Yeah.
-[crust crunches]
I think it's a really
interesting delicious loaf.
[Paul] Flavour wise,
texture wise, great job.
It just needed to be more uniform
with your filling. Pop it in the mixer,
all ingredients,
once you've proved your dough,
and just slowly turn it to introduce it
and then you shape it.
-I should've belled you beforehand.
-Yeah.
-I was across there. [laughs]
-Give you a shout next time.
Well, thank you very much.
That'll do me.
[both chuckle]
Because you've put
weight in the dough as seeds,
I'm thinking that this is gonna be
quite dense inside.
But the proof of the pudding
is in the eating.
[Prue] Go on then.
I would be so proud of that
if I'd done it.
[Prue and Paul chuckle]
It is dense
but nevertheless, it's delicious.
It's not perfect.
But it is 90-odd percent there.
Hmm, I wish I'd made it.
-Thank you.
-Well done. Thank you.
-[whispers] Wow. She wishes she'd made it.
I'll take that. [laughs]
That went pretty well.
-That's good feedback. [chuckles]
-[Tasha] Thank you, Prue.
Oh, it was lovely. [laughs]
It went well. Phew.
Monstrous?
I'd rather be monstrous than mediocre.
[Josh] That was good.
He liked the look of it. Had good colour.
One down two to go.
Oh, Flat Janice.
I'm definitely at the bottom.
But last week's technical, I won,
so hopefully, do a better job.
Smash it.
[sheep bleating]
[Alison] The bakers were able
to practise their first challenge,
but now, they face a mystery
shrouded in gingham.
Hello, welcome back to the tent.
It's time for your technical challenge.
Which today, has been set for you
by the bad boy of buns himself,
Mr Paul Hollywood.
Paul has been preparing some incredible
words of wisdom. Over to you, Paul.
It's all about the timing.
-I'm gonna put that on my Instagram.
-[laughs]
This technical will be judged blind,
so we're gonna have to ask our judges
to leave the tent.
-Bye-bye.
-Thank you.
To make sure there's no cheating,
they will be lowered into a medieval well.
[Alison laughs]
[Alison] Paul would like you to make
a batch of eight
delicious Devonshire splits.
-Ooh. I love Devonshire splits.
-What?
I do the splits
while eating Devonshire splits.
Now, the judges are looking for soft,
light and rich dough buns
that are split and then filled
with a homemade strawberry jam,
and freshly whipped cream.
Mmm. You have two hours and 30 minutes.
-[Alison] On your marks…
-Get set…
[in Jamaican accent] Bake!
Well, that's not
a lot of ingredients, is it?
I'm familiar with a Devonshire split.
It's like a doughnut,
and I love doughnuts.
[Tasha] I live adjacent to Devon.
[gasps] I've never seen one before.
Bit worried. I need a good technical,
because I had a mediocre signature.
So, I'm just looking round.
"Do not confer," it says,
but it doesn't say, "Don't look."
So, Paul, Devonshire splits. What a treat.
I grew up on these. My dad
used to make these in his bakery.
And they're just delicious.
Where they're gonna come unstuck
on this challenge is timing.
We've allowed for two proves in this.
-So, for the first prove?
-Well, you do it roughly 45 minutes.
As it starts to rise,
carbon dioxide begins to be formed
and flavour comes into it.
Then they can prepare the rolls.
They divide it into eight,
roll it into balls and prove it again.
Forty-five minutes on the second one,
stabilises the dough,
and gives it better flavour.
It's all down to the proving.
The oven bakes for around 15 minutes.
You want them
beautifully round and symmetrical.
You don't want any tears
in the side at all
and you want a nice flash of colour
to the bottom.
I wouldn't have thought a Devonshire split
could be so complicated.
[Paul] Now, no cutlery with this.
This is where we get cream
all over the show.
[Paul] Mmm-hmm.
Oh, yeah. It's soft in the mouth,
slightly chewy.
That is heaven.
Beautiful sweetness
from the strawberry and the cream.
I'm going to sit here and eat the lot.
-Not all those, but all of this.
-All of this.
[Nicky] "Step one, make the dough."
It's an enriched dough,
means it's enriched with milk and butter.
And I'm adding that to my flour,
yeast, salt and sugar,
bring it together to form a scraggly dough
and then get that kneaded.
Get your hands in. Get in there.
Gonna need to work quickly.
I'm keen to get my dough proving.
-You all right, Abbi?
-Hello, Alison.
How're you doing?
All right. Thank you.
Devonshire splits.
Have you ever made these before?
No, I haven't.
-Have you ever done the splits?
-No.
[both laugh]
You've gotta impress Paul with this.
Yeah. Need to get myself back on track
after Flat Janice.
Well, Janice tasted amazing.
She was very garlicky. The way I like it.
-Probably not what Prue wanted.
-So you've got to get this right.
-Keep kneading, babes.
-Thank you.
[Noel] Perfect Devonshire split dough…
Can feel that changing under my hands.
…requires lots of kneading.
[panting] That's like a workout.
[Noel] Not enough
and they could end up with tight buns.
[sighs wearily]
We're looking for something
very smooth and elastic.
You don't want it to tear.
-It's looking all right, that.
-Step five, "Prove."
Thank you very much
for all that information.
I'll give it as long as I can,
'cause I want it to be light and fluffy.
[Saku] I'm going to leave this
for 50 minutes.
Start with 30 minutes, check.
It'll need longer than that,
but whether we've got time to do it
longer than that?
There's gonna be a lot of
underproved buns today.
Next is to make the strawberry jam.
[Abbi] Chopped my strawberries,
put them in a pan with jam sugar,
hopefully I have the setting temperature
branded in my brain.
I'm trying to get this to 104 Centigrades.
[Nicky] Here we go.
It's bubbling away now.
Bit longer.
Looks all right. Hopefully it will work.
Steaming up, yes. [laughs]
-Jam is ready.
-[Dan] The dough's proving. Jam cooling.
Should've been a rapper.
-What's this?
-Giving you a double whammy.
-My strawberry jam.
-Looks lovely.
-What's your favourite jam?
-Mmm… Blueberry jam.
-Blueberry?
-Yes.
That is quite a bold statement.
-Why?
-How often do you make it?
I don't make it.
I'm buying from shop.
[all laugh]
Bakers, you are halfway through.
[both chuckle]
-Shh.
-Love watching her work.
[Cristy] See how much it's grown.
[Alison] If the bakers
underprove their dough…
-We're looking pretty groovy there.
-[Saku] Looks good.
[Alison] …they'll fail to produce
the light and springy texture
Paul and Prue expect.
[Abbi] It could do with longer, really,
but I can see quite a few people shaping.
Just a bit stressful.
"Divide the dough into eight pieces
and shape into each ball."
Six hundred and four divided by eight.
I can't do it.
Can't physically do the maths.
That's terrible.
-I'm going to have to book a course.
-75.4 grams each.
I'm just gonna eye it.
[Abbi] It could do with another
ten minutes, but we don't have that.
Now I'm gonna shape them
into little balls.
[Noel] Key to an even rise and avoiding
any tears in their dough,
the bakers must create
a smooth, taut skin.
I make a lot of bread rolls,
so I'm used to this.
That looks a wee bit wrinkled.
[Noel] Wrinkly balls.
-[both laugh]
-Wrinkly balls.
So we've got a pair for Prue
and a pair for Paul.
[both chuckle]
This is like a dream I've had.
-Paul's balls are out on a baking sheet.
-[both laugh]
[Josh] I'm pleased with those.
Nice and even.
Second prove, we're going in.
The most important prove.
I'm gonna do
the second prove for half an hour.
I've just got to wait now.
[exhales]
[exhales heavily] Ah.
I'm just trying to stay zen
before it all goes crazy in a minute.
[hums] Om!
Make them work.
Mmm.
I'm doing a dance for you
to keep you occupied.
Nice one. Nice, nice,
Thank you. [laughs]
[Nicky] They're getting there.
I'm giving them another three minutes.
[Dan] Five minutes left on the clock,
but I'm gonna live by the seat of
my pants and go for it.
We're going in then, big boy.
[sighs]
Can't believe Dan's in,
that's so stressful. Oh, my gosh.
Bakers, you've got half an hour left!
Drama there, weren't it?
That cut through the tent.
-Yeah.
-Like a hot knife through butter.
-[Tasha] Half an hour left
-[Saku] I'm happy with the rise
of the dough balls.
They've risen up,
not as much as I would like.
[Abbi] I'm not upset with them.
They're just a little on the small side.
I'm going in.
[Cristy] In they go.
Don't know how long they'll take,
I reckon 12, 15 minutes.
Going for 14 minutes
'cause that's my lucky number.
So next, "Make the Chantilly cream."
This is whipped up,
bit of icing sugar, vanilla.
Lo and behold, you'll have a Chantilly.
I want it to be a little bit
above soft peaks. Medium peaks.
[Saku] Looks good.
[chuckling] Oh! Just joking.
[laughs]
[Rowan] Looking good.
-You gonna use this? In here?
-[Rowan] Yeah.
Fill it with Chantilly.
Shall I use a wooden spoon?
-Just use a wooden spoon.
-It's convenience.
-Thanks.
-What about a bigger one?
What's this?
-That's where I write my--
-Poems in here.
-[Alison] Read one of the poems.
-"Dear Paul,
you look so good today
in your double denim."
"I think about your desert boots
all the time."
[all laugh]
-Oh, my gosh.
-That one gets a bit racy.
They're done. They're not big anyway,
they're quite dainty.
Get them out, nice and cool.
[Cristy] Dan's are out.
-I know. He's Speedy Gonzales.
-[Cristy] He's so speedy.
Do you know what?
I'm sure I've not put the caster sugar in.
Hence why my buns
are a little bit small.
What a doughnut I am. Dough-nut.
Bakers, you've got ten minutes left.
[exhales]
-Oh, my God.
-Okay, I'm getting them out.
[Tasha] Okay. We're good, we're good.
[Abbi] They're not baked evenly.
Here is a little bit under.
Now, gotta let them cool.
[Noel] Is it all about cooling?
-Before assemblage.
-Don't put cream into a hot bun.
-[mimics splattering]
-And drip out the other side.
Cool those balls. [laughs]
[humming]
[breathing heavily]
"Cut a deep slit
through the centre of each."
Think this is right. I don't have a clue.
Oh, these are shocking.
No sugar in it.
I'll tell you one thing.
It's too late now. [laughs]
Bakers, you've got five minutes left.
Have we really?
You know when you feel sick?
Jam time.
[Josh] Nice, thick jam anyway.
[Dana] The jam is perfect.
"Generously fill each bun
with whipped cream."
I want it to look neat.
Pipe it directly into the bun.
Gosh, it's splodging.
[Rowan] Oh, sodding hell. It's so bad.
Bakers, you have one minute left.
One minute, okay. We can do this.
Decorate with the strawberries.
[Rowan] Come on, strawbs.
[Dan] Must move quicker.
I don't know if this is the right way.
-[Cristy] Oh, my gosh.
-[Nicky, singsong] Shaky hands.
Oh, just hide the mistakes
with icing sugar.
[Rowan] That's monstrous to another level.
Bakers, your time is up.
Please come and bring
your Devonshire splits…
-[exhales]
-…and place them behind your photographs.
[Abbi] Oh, dear.
[Dan] The garish A&E look.
[Tasha] I forgot the icing sugar.
[Rowan] Wow.
That was awful.
Well, I did my best.
[Alison] It's time to judge
the bakers' Devonshire splits.
[Prue] Hmm.
We've got an array here, Prue.
We certainly have.
[Noel] Paul and Prue are looking for eight
equally-sized light and springy buns
filled with perfectly-set strawberry jam
and Chantilly cream.
And they have no idea whose is whose.
Okay. Let's start down this side.
Bit irregular in shape these, actually.
It's underproved,
you can tell by the cracks on the bottom.
They needed another 10, 15 minutes.
But they're soft inside,
-got a lovely flavour.
-[Prue] Jam's lovely.
Some of these are a bit odd.
-[Paul] These are small.
-This one's a bit peculiar.
[Paul] They're massively underproved.
As you press it,
it goes back to dough again.
-And they're very dense.
-[Prue] They are.
-Right.
-[Paul] The size of these is better.
-Much better.
-They are quite light.
-They are. Proved well.
-[Prue] They're big and light.
Good jam.
[Paul] Yeah, jam looks good.
-I like that.
-Decent one, size is good.
It's a shame
the cream's not looking nicer.
It does look like lots of cream,
which I like.
-Too small.
-[Paul] These are like golf balls.
This is, erm… It's really dense.
Needed much longer proving.
When you look at the bottom there,
it's ripped.
And it tastes yeasty. Mmm.
-[Paul] When you move on to…
-[Prue] These are neat.
They are neat and round,
but they're a little bit small.
That's the old thing of not proved enough.
[Paul] I'm not sure what these are.
They're not round.
[Prue] They're flat.
[Paul] They've been undermixed.
-It crumbles rather than stretches.
-[Prue] Yeah.
Don't taste very good.
Quite dry on the mouth.
I don't understand.
These are not bad, these buns.
Underproved slightly.
-But it's got a good texture.
-[Prue] Lovely texture.
-[Paul] Jam's good
-[Prue] Delicious.
It just needed icing sugar.
And moving on to this. Again, underproved.
See the split, but they are large.
-Nice flavour.
-[Prue] Nice jam.
Okay, moving on to these guys.
Bit underproved again.
It seems blown there. It's ripped.
It's a bit small.
Not bad though.
Moving on to these.
Er, again underproved, ripped.
That's quite dense, that.
-They're neat, but it's blown.
-[Prue] Mmm.
It's a shame. Okay.
[Noel] The Devonshire splits
will now be ranked…
All of them are slightly underproved.
These are the best.
…from last place to first.
In tenth place, we have this one.
Dan, they are too small, underproved,
-bit tough, good jam.
-Brilliant.
In ninth place,
we have this one.
Although it looks good,
turn it upside down
-to realise there was a few issues.
-Yeah.
[Alison] Abbi is eighth,
Matty seventh, Cristy sixth,
Nicky fifth, Josh is fourth
and Dana is third.
In second place, we have this one.
Tasha, they were very, very good.
No icing sugar for some reason.
In the first place, we have these.
[all applauding]
The bun itself was excellent,
you got a nice tension in there.
The flavour was good,
so it was well proved.
You did really well.
[Saku giggling]
I'm so happy.
[sighs]
[Dan] Disappointed I forgot
to put caster sugar in.
Just gotta dust yourself down
and go again.
I think they're too kind to me actually.
It really was like eating cement,
when I tried it, so, fair enough.
Look, I know I'm crying.
It's just 'cause I get
really emotional really easily.
I know I'm definitely
at the bottom of the pack now.
[sighs] I just need to really
smash my showstopper.
[Noel] Just one challenge remains
before someone's named
Star Baker of Bread Week,
and someone's time
in the competition is up.
-This is your week, Paul.
-It's all about Hollywood.
-What did you think of the standard?
-Pretty poor in the technical.
-[Noel laughs]
-[snorts] Don't mince your words.
[Paul] But I do think
Tash is doing really well.
Josh is there or thereabouts.
I think Saku's the same.
Going into the showstopper,
who needs to pull it out of the bag?
-Abbi, who had the problem with the salt.
-[Alison] Yeah.
Abbi had a problem with the technical,
which puts her in a precarious position.
It's not just her though. I think
Rowan… Dan, he had a terrible technical.
Started well, but he's fallen off a cliff.
Which is crazy
'cause he's been so consistent.
They're in trouble.
-I love when you get really strict, Paul.
-Oh, right.
So nice.
-Turns you on, does it?
-A little bit.
[all laughing]
[Noel] Wow.
Hello, bakers. Welcome back to the tent.
It's time for your showstopper challenge.
Today, the judges would love you to make
a visually stunning
plaited bread centrepiece.
[Alison] Now your showstopper
can be sweet or savoury.
It's entirely up to you, but it must have
two different types of flour,
and include your incredible
bread plaiting skills.
If you wanna practise your plaits,
me and Alison are going out
on the razz tonight.
-We are.
-You're welcome to sort our barnets out.
We'll be in the corner with a tea
towel around our shoulders. [laughing]
You've got four hours
for your showstopper.
-On your marks…
-Get set…
Bake!
[mimics explosion]
Oh, here we go again.
[Matty] The hardest part
about this is plaiting.
It's not something
I've got much experience of.
I've watched so many YouTube videos
and I still can't plait my own hair, so…
I'm hoping I can plait bread today.
The showstopper challenge
is a plaited centrepiece loaf.
Now this is their chance
to really show off to Prue and I
what they can actually do with dough.
The focus for this challenge
is on the plaiting.
Of course, we want the bread
to be delicious.
It can be flavoured.
They can put fillings in there.
[Rowan] God, it smells good.
I could just put my face in that.
But what we are really looking for
is some intricate and amazing plaiting.
[Paul] There are numerous plaits
they could do
to create an image that they want.
It's like painting a picture with braids.
I wanna see something that makes me go,
"How did they do that?"
-[Paul] Morning, Abbi.
-[Abbi] Morning!
Tell us about your plaited showstopper.
I am making a tree
because I love trees. [laughs]
Wherever I go, I have my favourite tree.
That's what it represents.
What's your favourite tree?
[Abbi] Right now,
that lovely pink horse chestnut there.
-[Noel] Beautiful.
-[Abbi] It's very nice.
So I'm making a walnut and Stilton
trunk and branches.
The leaves will be made
from wild garlic and nettle.
And then this is made with dock flour
from the seeds of dock leaves.
[Noel] You been out foraging?
-I picked these.
-[Noel] Brilliant.
Abbi will make dock flour dough mushrooms
to sit at the base of her tree.
Its leaves made from nettle
and wild garlic three-strand plaits,
while its trunk will be plaited
from no less than nine.
-Nine strands?
-[Abbi] Nine strand.
Nine, I've not done before.
Honestly, Abbi, it's wonderfully ambitious
and it sounds as if it could be terrific.
I do need it. I'm hoping
that today I can smash it.
-You wanna stay, don't you?
-I do.
I've got so many more different
foraged things that I want to…
Concentrate and get it done
the best you can.
This is what I'm focusing on.
[Noel] Abbi's favourite tree has a friend.
I am making a Rowan tree,
a bread Rowan tree.
So I'm just popping the spices in
for my sweet curry wholemeal loaf.
I've got a hefty amount going in.
I want to punch 'em
right in the jaw with the flavour.
[Noel] Fighting to stay
in the competition,
Rowan's flavour-packed tree also features
a six-strand plaited
marzipan challah trunk
supporting a bacon and parmesan
three-strand crown,
complete with red rowan berries.
-How big is it gonna be in total?
-It's about this tall.
-Wow.
-Oh, my goodness.
-It's huge.
-Proper showstopper.
-It'll be lying down, not standing up.
-Standing up.
-I got my dad to make me a structure.
-[Prue] A frame.
-This is gonna be colourful and huge.
-Massive.
And delicious.
-Yeah.
-I like it.
[panting] Ah.
This is one kilo of flour
which is quite a lot to do by hand.
[Alison] With at least
two different doughs to make,
the bakers have their work cut out
to mix and knead them
before the crucial first prove.
[Nicky] It's not easy
kneading with this great big lump.
Look at these. Been in the proving drawer?
-They've been in the proving drawer.
-Look at the guns.
Never been to a gym.
I just make bread every day.
[all laughing]
[Alison] The longer they take,
the less time they have
to create the intricate plaits
Paul and Prue want to see.
It's a lot of dough, yeah.
I just want to get it proven.
[Nicky] All right, it's going in.
That's my wholemeal bread.
I have decided to make today
a Highland cow called Angus.
I always wanted one as a pet.
This big hairy animal
just in your back garden,
chomping on your grass
and keeping it down.
Ah, I'd love one.
[Noel] Nicky's Highland heifer
will be both savoury and sweet,
with hair and ears
containing Comté cheese and lardons,
and the face and horns
packed with pecans and dates.
What two flours have you gone for?
-I did wholemeal for his face.
-Yeah. Healthy.
-Yeah?
-And his horns.
-"Horins"?
-Horns.
-Horins?
-Can't say… [hesitates]
Horns?
[enunciates] Horns.
I love the way you say it.
-Horns.
-Horins?
I'm excited about this,
especially seeing his "horins."
-[Nicky laughs]
-[chuckles]
[Noel] Saku's also been inspired
by an animal close to her heart.
I am going to make a peacock.
I love peacocks.
They are lovely, colourful creatures.
[Alison] Saku will recreate
the peacock's beautiful tail feathers
from white dough
flavoured with garlic and rosemary,
and the branch her bird will sit upon
from seeded spelt dough,
and she's hoping her plaiting experience
will give her an advantage.
I'm doing this from age 16.
And my daughter's 21.
Still, I do her hair. Aw, my baby girl.
[Abbi] Right, that's my wild garlic dough.
This is going in.
[Noel] As the last of the bakers' doughs
hit the proving drawer,
some are ready to come out.
-[Tasha] It's risen.
-Look really lovely. All nice and bouncy.
[Rowan] I don't know.
I don't want to underprove.
I'm gonna put it back in.
[Noel] But before plaiting starts…
We're gonna add the Stilton.
…there's the chance to add extra flavour.
This is cranberry and orange dough.
Orange is coming only from the zest.
I've got my cranberries
soaked in orange juice as well.
[Tasha] I'm mixing in pastrami and cheese.
Which is a little bit messy.
[Alison] While the rest add their fillings
before rolling their strands…
[Matty] So just kind of trying
to distribute this as evenly as we can.
[Alison] …Dan's decided
to add his one at a time.
[Dan] What I'm gonna do is individual
strands are the fillings in each strand
and then roll it up to make
a lattice type braided loaf.
They criss-cross each other.
It's gonna form
two round circular wreaths.
I'm gonna make the word "pizza"
out of the remaining dough.
[Noel] Looking to bounce back
after yesterday's disastrous technical,
Dan's going all-out
with an ambitious five-piece showstopper.
He'll pack his first plaited pizza wreath
with fennel sausage, nduja and mozzarella,
and his second with truffle salami,
truffle cheddar and smoked provolone.
Love making pizzas, love cooking outdoors,
so I'm just bringing the flavours
we've really enjoyed with our pizzas
to this bread basically.
[Alison] And Dan won't be dining
al fresco alone.
I am doing a picnic basket.
This is green chutney dough.
Just what we called sandwiches growing up.
So it's just a filling of coriander paste
with all the different spices
and everything
in two pieces of white bread.
And it was sensational.
[Alison] Filled with
plaited wholemeal bagels,
Dana will weave plaits of her
green chutney and sundried tomato dough
over a mixing bowl
to give her picnic basket its shape.
[Dana] I am just doing
a three-strand plait.
It's what I know and it's the fastest
and I have to cover the whole basket.
So I wanna go for speed.
[Cristy] I'm gonna do
an eight-stranded plait.
Which, erm, I thought was
a good idea at the time. [chuckles]
[Noel] To sit snugly inside her
complicated eight-strand honey challah,
Cristy will also bake
a chocolate and almond babka.
Both traditional
Jewish plaited sweetbreads.
My grandpa's Jewish.
When I was younger my grandpa lived
in a beautiful home in Primrose Hill.
After Sunday lunch,
we used to walk through the parks.
It represents all the lovely memories.
Hopefully I can do it justice. Oh, gosh.
[sighs] Let's start plaiting.
Help me, Lord.
Bakers, two hours left.
You're halfway through.
-Is there anything you'd like to say?
-[laughing] No.
If you wanna speak to me,
go through my lawyer.
[laughs]
So this is the trunk of the tree.
It's quite long.
And remember, this has got to stand up.
So the nerves are setting in.
[Alison] Whether the bakers have been
ambitious with their choice of plait…
So there's six strands alternating,
some go over, some go below.
Quite a complex one.
…or have gone for something simpler…
These are three-strand plaits
to make the feathers of the peacock.
…Paul and Prue will expect to see
beautifully even braids.
[Abbi] This is gonna be my central trunk.
I'm doing nine strands.
I've really enjoyed
the bread-plaiting aspect of this.
You just learn the rhythm
and then it's easy.
Er… Go across there.
This is like maths to me,
I don't know what's going on. Erm…
[Dana] The basket is taking shape.
I had a dream last night that my
bread picnic basket was gonna collapse.
It has once on practice.
I'm hoping it doesn't.
I'm just shoving pecans in the horns.
[Noel] As the bakers put the finishing
touches to their first plaited pieces…
That's it done. Let's get that to prove.
-I just hope it's big enough.
-[sighs]
-…Dan…
-[exhales heavily]
…and his ambitious five-piece showstopper…
I'm making my inside wreath.
But I need to get my outside plaits
round them as well, yet.
…are falling behind.
I am feeling pinched for time.
There's a lot to do.
So, yeah. Best get a wiggle on.
Oh, what a day.
[Alison] The bakers have just 90 minutes
to finish their plaited bread showstopper.
[Dan] One down. Not long enough left.
So these are gonna prove.
Next is the leaves.
What have I done?
It's meant to be a four-strand plait,
and it's gone from a four-strand
to a three-strand into a four-strand.
I've never messed something up so badly.
But it's a root,
it's meant to have informalities.
-[Alison] How you feeling?
-Bit stressed, but just--
Well, I've just walked in here,
and not being funny,
the atmosphere is very tense, isn't it?
Everybody's really concentrating.
-It's because of Paul.
-Yeah.
[Cristy] He's the bread king.
[Alison] Everyone wants
to impress him, isn't it?
I'm plaiting snakes. I'm making a Medusa.
Snakes.
My grandma saw one of my practice bakes
and she thought they were prawns.
My mum thought they were
something else entirely. So…
We'll see how they
turn out today. [laughs]
[Alison] Inspired by her love
of Greek mythology,
Tasha will plait Medusa's face and hands
from rye and wholemeal milk bread,
filled with pastrami and cheese,
while the green snakes
will be made from spelt dough
flavoured with pistachio pesto.
Are you hoping
to turn the judges to stone? [chuckles]
So I'm deliberately covering her eyes.
-[Noel laughing]
-So,
-Paul and Prue, erm--
-Are safe.
Yes, exactly.
[Noel] Tasha's isn't the only showstopper
likely to cause a few sleepless nights.
[Matty] I support West Ham.
So I'm going for a West Ham badge.
-Are you?
-Yeah.
-And how they doing?
-We've had better days.
[laughs] They're not doing good?
Oh. By the time this airs,
they'll be smashing it.
[laughs]
[Noel] Keen to make a push
for the top spot,
Matty will plait the hammers
from spiced wholegrain spelt dough,
while the shield will be made
from two different plaited white doughs,
one flavoured with cheddar and jalapeños,
the other sundried tomato,
basil and red onion.
I like the idea. The flavours sound good.
What about colouring it?
What colours are West Ham?
They're claret and blue,
and on practice, it looked like
what you get at a fairground.
You don't think West Ham is a fairground?
-No, we're a serious team now, Prue.
-Oh, I see. Hmm.
[Matty and Noel laughing]
[Alison] There's another sports fan
in the tent today.
[Josh] So I'm doing a tiger
'cause I'm a Leicester Tigers supporter,
the rugby team.
I've been following them all my life.
We have a little tiger here,
which we'd often take to games.
I've had it for as long as I can remember.
It's an old tiger.
[Alison] Josh will use
two different enriched doughs,
one flavoured with cranberry and orange,
the other chocolate and orange,
to create a tiger-stripe effect
once plaited.
Is that your inspiration?
-[Josh] Yeah, my tiger mascot.
-Who is that?
-He's not really got a name…
-Can I touch him?
-Of course you can.
-He's not got a name.
-Shall we name him?
-You can.
-What should we name him?
-Paul?
Well, it's Bread Week.
-Probably should.
-Call this Paul. Let's get some water.
-We christen you, Paul Hollywood.
-[laughing]
There you go.
Guys, one hour left. You can do this.
Right, last bit. I'm just doing
my, er, letters, my I, Z and Z.
This needs to be done, like, now.
I'm gonna make a couple of ears.
I'll stick a nose on.
It looks like a tiger head.
[Nicky] These are for Angus' hair.
What's happening here? What are these… Oh.
-It's Angus.
-It's a puzzle.
-I don't know if I can do it.
-[both laugh]
[Noel groaning]
-Yeah!
-[Nicky laughing] Yay!
[Tasha] This is the base of her face,
which mostly will be covered by her hands.
This is the worst part,
because the plaits have to be so fine,
otherwise they end up
like massive club hands.
[softly] My back is killing me. Oh.
[Noel] As the last plaits prove…
[Matty] This is the hammers.
We'll go in now.
[Noel] …the first are ready
for the oven.
It's gonna go in at 230 for about
ten minutes, then we're turning it down.
[Nicky] I'll do 20,
but it might be longer. Cheerio.
The head of the tiger's gone in the oven.
That'll have half an hour.
[Alison] But the bakers
have no time to rest.
[Abbi] A little mushroom. Isn't that cute?
These are gonna be the eyes for my tiger.
-[Alison] With so much still to bake…
-[Cristy] This is the babka.
[Alison] …their batch-baking skills
are being put to the test.
We're going in. About 25 minutes.
[Rowan] I've only got an hour
to prove, bake, assemble.
So I'm feeling the stress.
[Noel] And Rowan's not alone.
Dan's pizza is missing
a couple of crucial details.
[Dan] Not done my little bit
for my P or my A.
I've literally got no dough left.
Absolute shocker.
Trying to think how to make the letters.
[Alison] As the first bakes…
[Abbi] Ooh.
[Alison] …exit the oven…
Oh, my gosh. She's enormous.
[Josh] I reckon that's about done.
[Alison] …Rowan's giant marzipan
tree trunk is finally ready to go in.
[Rowan] This will be
until it's golden brown.
I don't work in numbers.
I work in visuals.
I'm painting the last of my snakes
and then I'm done,
-but they just need to bake.
-[Nicky] Last little bit of glossing.
[Matty grunts] Oh.
[Nicky] Go on, matey. Do your business.
I'm gonna bang 'em in.
[Noel] With the pizza wreaths
finally baking…
Cross all fingers.
…Dan has a plan for his missing letters.
I'll do some dead dough
which is just flour and water.
Shape some bits for a P,
and two for the A.
It's the only thing I can do.
Bakers, you've got half an hour left.
[chuckles]
Oh, it's going to be tight.
[Saku] Last one.
Everything is in the oven,
I've just put in my leaves.
[Rowan] This is the top of the tree.
Making it green,
otherwise it don't look like owt, does it?
With these on top,
my little Rowan berries.
It's looking nice. I'm gonna glaze it now.
It looks good. I'm waiting
for the last one to come out.
[Dana] It's heavy.
[Cristy] Do you have to take the bowl out?
No. When the bowl comes out,
if not cooled down, it'll collapse.
Right, that's everything out,
these are my wild garlic flowers.
I'm using them to illustrate
the tree being in blossom.
[Dan] The letters,
I'm gonna put 'em in 20 minutes.
Bakers, you've got 15 minutes left.
No, I'm not.
It's coming out.
[Tasha] Should be patient.
It's ever so slightly doughy, so I want it
back in for literally a minute.
I'd rather Paul and Prue say,
"Oh, they've caught their edges a bit,"
than go, "They're raw."
Angus, mate, you've risen.
-Sounds good.
-[Matty] I'm freestyling.
Doing bits of blue
and then we'll do claret.
He's got his stripes going down.
I'm pleased.
[exhales]
[Cristy] This is the babka.
Looks nice, but I don't know
if it'll go in the middle.
[exhales]
Stressful. I can only go as fast
as the oven, unfortunately.
Please be done, please be done.
Oh, you are done.
Little Angus, come on, matey. Oh.
Oh.
Bakers, you have one minute left.
Tight.
[Dan] Come on.
[Rowan groans]
[Cristy] Maybe I should
just present it on the side?
It's okay, everything's still quite warm.
[Dan] Think that's a bit under.
[Abbi] They do look like
little mushrooms, don't they?
[Alison] Bakers, that is your time up.
Please step away from your showstoppers.
[exhales]
Well, I'm happy with that.
It's still up.
I've managed to get it up and keep it up.
It's turned out how I wanted to.
That's all I can ask for every time.
[Noel] It's judgement time for the bakers'
plaited bread showstoppers.
Josh, bring your showstopper
to the front. Let's have a look.
I think it's amazing.
It's really effective and you've
chosen wisely with the doughs
to give you depth of colour
with the chocolate bread
and then the cranberry and orange one.
And you get the face shape
just by plaiting. It's absolutely amazing.
Does this mascot have a name?
Was christened Paul by Alison.
[Prue chuckles]
-A beautiful christening. Was lovely.
-[Noel laughs]
[Prue] It's absolutely delicious.
-Fantastic flavour. I think it's gorgeous.
-Oh. Phew.
[Paul] It's an enriched dough.
You've managed to achieve
the same texture in two doughs,
-that's quite a trick.
-Very clever.
It's ingenious.
It's well thought out and well executed.
-Excellent.
-Thank you.
[Paul] The overall look of that
is beautiful.
It's really clever. Let's try this.
-Remind me of the flavours.
-[Nicky] It's pecan and date.
I've had a big lump
and there's nothing in there.
It tastes lovely if you get a pecan.
[Nicky] So this is
Comté cheese and lardons.
-[Prue] Certainly get the cheese.
-Do you?
-[Prue] It's lovely.
-The cheese you get, there is no bacon.
I think your display's incredible.
It's down to distribution
of your flavours inside.
I hope you're
allowed back in the ground, mate.
-Oh.
-[Prue laughs] That's…
-[laughs]
-That's a bit unkind.
[laughter]
I like your design. Lovely.
Like a bit of art.
Let's try this one first.
-[Prue] This looks a bit biscuit-y.
-It's bone dry.
This looks more promising.
You can see the structure
on that is so much better.
I like the chillies.
And the bread is just beautiful.
The bread is very good.
Saku, would you like to bring up
your showstopper, please?
Do you want a hand?
Come on, Saku, stop messing around.
[all laughing]
I think it looks great.
It's quite striking.
But this is underproved.
You can see the split
all the way down the middle.
[Prue] Hmm, try that one.
[Saku] That is spelt-seeded.
It's quite gluey in the mouth.
Hmm, it's a bit bland and a bit dense.
-Mmm-hmm.
-[Paul] Remind us of the flavours?
[Saku] Rosemary and garlic.
You've certainly got the flavour,
but it's quite dry.
I think it's really impressive bread art.
It's a little disappointing to eat.
[imperceptible]
I have to say,
it looks absolutely fantastic.
Thank you.
-You should be proud of your dad.
-Yeah. Thanks, John.
-[Prue chuckles]
-This is…
[Rowan] The wholemeal sweet curry.
-It is very strong.
-It's hideous, yeah.
The dough is raw inside.
It's so, so dense.
There's so much curry in there.
The yeast is going,
"Help me, I can't rise."
-Okay.
-[Paul] Hmm, this is the…
[Rowan] Smoked bacon,
rosemary and parmesan.
-[Prue] It's quite heavy.
-Okay.
Over-flavoured.
And the yeast is going,
"Not the second time, I still can't rise."
Is it going to be the same for this?
Who knows?
-[Paul] This is the marzipan.
-[Rowan] Yeah.
-That's more open.
-That looks lovely.
That is such a relief after
the strength of your other flavours.
And the crust is absolutely delicious.
But it's not enough
to compensate for the other two.
-[Paul] I'm just gonna…
-[Prue] That's what I wanted to do.
The best of it is this beautiful plaiting
and frankly,
I think you've spoilt it
with this tat.
-[Noel] Tat?
-[Alison] Tat.
-I thought that was one of your earrings.
-[laughs]
-[Paul] This one is…
-[Dana] Coriander and cumin.
[Prue] That is delicious.
Your flavours are absolutely spot on.
I just would've liked
a bit of crispiness on there.
When you're doing a basket,
take it off the bowl,
'cause this has now gone soggy.
The bread, as it's cooling,
is sweating on the bowl.
But I think it tastes great.
[Prue] It's beautiful.
My mouth's watering.
I actually want to eat it.
But because you didn't get that in there,
you don't see the glory
of the centrepiece.
[Paul] Let's have a look
at this one first.
That looks beautiful, doesn't it?
It's very light.
Okay, good.
It's a lovely challah,
the flavour's fantastic, texture's good.
[Prue] Let's taste that.
Mmm. Lovely flavour.
The nuts and the chocolate
work really well.
They're both very good breads.
I think overall,
the design is rudimentary.
This is a what plait?
A nine. That's the walnut and Stilton.
[Paul] Needs more Stilton.
There's definitely a flavour,
but you can get much stronger flavour.
This is the wild garlic and…
[Abbi] And nettle.
It's extremely green, isn't it?
It feels as if it's doing you good.
[Paul] I like the flavour, it's unusual.
But needs to be more open.
It's a bit dense.
-Cake-like.
-[Abbi] Mmm.
[Prue] I'm so interested
in that dock seed flour.
There's almost a pepperiness to it.
I like your flavours. They're unusual.
Some I've never had before, I like that.
-Thank you very much.
-[Paul] Thank you, Abbi.
These aren't baked.
I mean, that colour's wrong.
Did you run out of time and had to
take them out before they were baked?
-Yeah.
-[Paul] It's a shame.
Is this all the same?
Yeah. Tuscan sausage, nduja, tomato,
mozzarella and basil.
Mmm, it's quite powerful.
It's too doughy. More air, more bake.
I think this one might be
a little bit raw.
It's such a pity, because that
has the makings of a really good loaf.
It's just so unlike you.
You know, I know, we all know
you can do a helluva lot better than that.
[Dan sighs]
[whispers] Okay?
I think it's beautiful.
It really is, it's a work of art.
[Prue] The hands are the most beautifully
plaited, look at those little fingers.
The face has real expression,
quite sinister.
And the hair, very, very clever.
You've caught some of them in the oven.
It's gone a bit too dark.
-[Prue] Yeah.
-[Paul] Let's try the pesto one.
[Prue] Mmm.
It's a really strong fresh pesto.
Just delicious.
That's very good.
Let's try the face, shall we?
[Tasha] That's pastrami and cheese.
Tasha, you are one hell of a bread baker.
-Wow. [chuckles] Thank you.
-That is beautiful.
Stunning.
-Wow.
-Never seen anything like that before.
The flavours are good,
the textures are good.
You understand bread and I like that.
-Thank you.
-[Paul] Thank you.
-Well done, Tasha.
-Thank you.
Well done, Tash, amazing.
Well done, girl.
[exhales]
Yeah, I'm so happy. [laughs]
That comment from Paul,
I think that's the biggest win
of Bread Week for me,
I understand bread.
Flipping heck.
That's amazing.
[sighs in relief]
Diabolical.
Paul said monstrous yesterday,
hideous today.
Gonna get that tattooed.
[Abbi] They did have their criticisms,
but they really liked my flavours.
I'm aware that
because of how yesterday went,
I might not have done enough.
Pretty gutted.
Erm, I was looking forward to Bread Week.
Prue gave me some nice words
'cause she knows I can do it.
I know myself I can do it.
But, erm, I have a sense
I'm probably gonna go today.
Well, Bread Week's ended up
as dread week, didn't it?
Well, some of it was a bit disappointing.
[Paul] Some bakers
got a bit caught up with the plaiting
and ignored the flavour and the texture.
Point in question would be Rowan.
Because however great that tree looked,
that curry bread was,
I wouldn't say unedible,
but it was certainly on the way.
-I was shocked with Dan.
-[Prue] Everything was raw.
[Alison] Is he in danger?
He is. He did really well in the signature
but he's put himself down there.
Can we talk about Abbi?
[Paul] Abbi's had a bit of a shocker.
The thing I loved was her foraging.
Her flavours were unique, but overall,
it came down to textures.
Who really surprised you today?
[Noel] You loved Tasha's?
[Paul] The flavours she achieved
was really nice.
And she did it so beautifully.
Those hands are just exquisite.
Same size as your hands.
-I know.
-[all laugh]
And I felt like Josh was really good.
[Paul] That was a great loaf.
So now for Star Baker,
I think it is between Josh and Tasha.
-Going home, it's between Dan, Abbi…
-[Prue] Abbi.
[Paul] …and Rowan.
Well, you've got some big decisions
to make.
-[Paul] Hmm.
-Good luck.
Thank you. If you didn't wrap it up,
-we'd be here forever.
-[laughs]
Hi there, bakers,
I'm really, really excited
to be announcing this week's Star Baker.
And according to the judges,
they are absolutely smashing it.
So, this week's Star Baker is…
Tasha.
[all applauding]
Which means I've got the horrible job
of announcing the person who's leaving us.
And the person who's leaving us
this week is…
Abbi. Sorry.
That's okay.
[chuckles softly]
Ah, well done.
Oh, no.
[Abbi] I knew it was coming.
You know what, I'm really proud of myself.
And… sorry. [sniffles]
Got my hanky this time. [laughs]
-I'm absolutely gutted.
-Oh, Abbi.
I never thought I'd be able to do this.
It's given me a massive confidence boost,
and I've met such amazing people.
And I'm gonna remember every day
for the rest of my life.
But I'm quite looking forward
to getting back to my vegetables.
What am I gonna do without you?
[Rowan] I do feel lucky.
It's a bit bittersweet.
I'm devoed, 'cause I love Abbi.
You don't want your friends to leave.
We're all friends, it's awful.
-Lot better next time.
-[Dan] Yeah.
Abbi going is really tough.
Lovely girl, love her, she's brilliant.
Did enough to wiggle through,
can't afford another week like this.
[Noel] Check you out.
-Thank you.
-[Noel] Two in a row.
Bloody hell.
I got Star Baker again.
[chuckling] What the hell? What the hell?
-That's amazing.
-[Tasha] Bloody hell.
I go into things
with quite low expectations of myself and…
I think I need to
stop doing that. [chuckles]
[closing theme music playing]